title: Chow Kit
date: 09/08/2011
abstract: A feel for the Indonesian cultured sub-district of Malaysia

Arriving late meant I could not sample the city's monorail at night, instead
opting for a taxi. A tip for anyone stuck in KL Sentral after the trains have
finished: go upstairs to level two and look for the *coupon* taxi stand (near a
7/11). You buy a pre-priced ticket and get a genuine driver rather than the over
priced (one quoted three times as much as I paid) ones on the ground floor.

After trawling the bustling streets near Chow Kit, I found my hostel; Hotel
Cosmopolitan. The area itself has a grungy feel but full of life. Street markets
and constant fireworks; I'm in Malaysia during Ramadan, only beginning to
realise the extent of the Muslim culture here.

In a room with no windows, I overslept until 4pm, bewilderingly having to ask
"is that *really* the time?!". *Bring an alarm* if your schedule is tight.

I headed out to try some street food in the market just outside. Using the old
trick of watching what the locals buy, I had a mix of Indian chaats and oozing
coconut jelly. On a local's recommendation, I took the metro into KLCC; a very
westernised area of shopping areas (they even had Topman!) and tourist
attractions. With a few mandatory shots of the admittedly impressive looking
Petronas Towers and gardens, I hit the eastern side of Chow Kit.

Invoking the second trick of looking for the busiest restaurant in the Malay
village surroundings, I had a chicken dish (and drink) for less than £1.
Worried about a "tourist tax", this was excellent and definitely recommendable.
Look for Jalan Raja Muda Musa (near Kampung Baru station) if you get the chance.

With the UK riots on the news besides me, I'm back to the cosy hostel, planning
for the Batu Caves tomorrow.
